# Full Info
## How do eclipses occur?
 Eclipses occur when the Sun, Earth and Moon align. This phenomenon is possible due to the distance there is in between them and the orbital movement that is inherent to both the Moon and Earth. This event happens from four to seven times a year. 
## Why do only some people on Earth see an eclipse at a given time? What is the difference between a lunar and solar eclipse in terms of watchability?
 This limitation is owing to the casted shadow and the way the observable elements relate to each other. The Moon orbits the Earth, and the Earth orbits the Sun, making the possibility of an eclipse being visible from the entire world null. Even so, there is a big difference between a solar and lunar eclipse in terms of how many can see it at the same time.
In lunar eclipses, the likelihood of observing it is much higher than in solar eclipses because the Earth casts its shadow over the Moon. This allows a much wider audience to experience the event, since anyone can see the changes if the moon is visible.
In solar eclipses, when the Moon aligns in between the Sun and the Earth, only those that are in the Moon’s umbra can fully see the effect of the eclipse. Those in the penumbra, the wider casted shadow, will get a taste of it as a partial solar eclipse, while others won’t catch even a glimpse of the eclipse.
## What causes the Sun, Moon, and Earth to align?
To explain the alignment, we must understand why they orbit around each other.
From the beginning of our solar system, the newborn star of it, the Sun, formed after the clouds of hydrogen and helium gas contracted, growing dense and hot enough to ignite. Part of these gases form a thin flat disk orbiting the star with other heavier elements (C, N, O, Si, Fe). As it cools down, these elements stick together because of the electrostatic charges in effect and grow into planetesimals, kilometer-scale bodies. The planetesimals collide due to gravity and grow into full-sized planets. These planets are eroded by the surrounding gas and due to the immense mass of the star, are heavily attracted to it since the gravitational force that it produces is related to its mass. This forces them into almost circular orbits. This theory is known as accretion and is widely accepted as a planet formation theory.1
Just like how planets are drawn towards the Sun, satellites like the Earth’s Moon are also gravitationally attracted by the planet they orbit.
Gravitational forces influence all objects in the universe, regardless of their distance from each other, although distance is important for the force’s magnitude. This force plays an important role in the formation of solar systems, as celestial bodies experience different attraction to the sun, leading them to orbit in distinct trajectories with varying speeds and distances from the star. Objects that cannot grow large enough are drawn towards their star, eventually colliding with it and merging.
The Moon is thought to have formed through accretion from a massive impact on Earth during the latter stages of the planet's formation approximately 4.5 billion years ago. It is believed that the colliding body or bodies were as large as Mars. This celestial body was named Theia, after the Greek goddess who was the mother of the Moon goddess.
With the capabilities offered by cutting edge technologies, the exploration of complex scenarios for the Moon's formation is possible, as demonstrated by NASA and Durham University. 2 This marks the first high-resolution recreation of the potential accretion process of the Moon.3  The study brings to the attention the possibility that the Moon might have been formed relatively quickly, perhaps within a matter of hours, challenging previous research that suggested a long formation process and that the Moon may have initially orbited close to the Earth’s surface for some time before moving to its current orbit. (4, pp. 551-556) 
## How often do eclipses occur? What is an eclipse season and why do they occur approximately every six months?
Lunar eclipses average to be two per year, but there can be as many as three to five. A third of the lunar eclipses are Blood Moons, or total lunar eclipses where the Moon turns a dark red color due to the refraction of light caused by the Earth.5 Solar eclipses occur as often as lunar eclipses, but they tend to not be total solar eclipses. Total solar eclipses take place every 18 months.
The Moon takes close to a month to travel around the Earth, in which time it goes through the different Moon phases and, when the Moon is full, eclipses can occur if it is the eclipse season.
An eclipse season is one of the two periods that occur each year when the Sun, the Moon, and Earth align, allowing for eclipses to take place. These seasons last approximately 35 days and repeat just short of six months later. They occur approximately every six months because the Moon's tilted orbit aligns at the correct angle for an eclipse to occur twice during one Earth-Sun revolution. During each season, multiple eclipses occur, including both solar and lunar eclipses. There can be up to three eclipses in a single season.
## How do scientists know when and where eclipses will occur?
The prediction of eclipses nowadays is done using Friedrich Bessel research. By using eight Besselian elements, a set of values related to the Moon's position relative to Earth, the process of determining when and where eclipses will occur was significantly simplified without compromising accuracy. 6 (extra info: 9, pp. 3)
## Solar and Lunar eclipses
Both eclipses can only occur at the full moon phase.
Lunar eclipses occur when the Earth's shadow falls upon the surface of the Moon, resulting in events that can last several hours. These eclipses can take one of three forms: total, partial, or penumbral. 7
-       During total lunar eclipses, the Moon is positioned within the Earth's umbra. As it is completely enveloped by the Earth's shadow, longer-wavelength colors, which scatter less easily in the Earth's atmosphere compared to shorter wavelengths, reach the Moon and give it its distinctive reddish color.
-       In partial lunar eclipses, the alignment is imperfect, resulting in the Moon passing through part of the Earth’s umbra. The shadow covers the Moon partially and then recedes.
-       Penumbral lunar eclipses are easy to miss since the Moon barely dims as it doesn’t go through the Earth’s shadow umbra. Instead, it only goes through the penumbral shadow.
Solar eclipses occur when the Moon comes between the Earth and the Sun. These events are visible only from specific locations. The region on Earth where the Moon's umbra makes contact is known as the path of totality, and it is the only area where total solar eclipses can be observed. Solar eclipses can take one of four forms: total, annular, partial, or hybrid. 8
-       Total solar eclipses occur when the Moon completely blocks the Sun. During these events, the sky darkens, and with favorable weather conditions, the Sun's corona becomes visible. Total solar eclipses are the only ones that can be safely observed without protection, but only during the brief period when the Moon fully obscures the Sun.
-       Annular solar eclipses are those where the Moon is close to or at its furthest point from Earth. This is known as the Moon’s Apogee and it makes it appear smaller, making the eclipse look as if a ring formed from the Moon overlapping the Sun.
-       Partial solar eclipses are when the Sun, Moon and Earth are not perfectly lined up. Part of the sun is covered. During solar and annular eclipses, those outside of the umbra’s shadow see a partial eclipse.
-   Hybrid solar eclipses occur when an eclipse transitions between being annular and total. This phenomenon is a result of the Earth's curvature, which allows for the observation of annular and total phases in different locations where the Moon's umbra is cast at the same time.
Solar eclipses are possible due to a similarity in proportions. The Moon is approximately 400 times smaller than the Sun, but is also around 400 times closer to Earth. This proportion changes with the passing of time, since the Moon moves a few centimeters away from the Earth each year. Still, solar eclipses will remain for at least another 600 million years.
## What is the difference between a lunar and solar eclipse?
Both eclipses occur once the Sun, Moon and Earth align. This can only happen in the eclipse seasons.
Lunar eclipses occur when the Earth's shadow is cast over the Moon. The Sun, Earth, and Moon align with the Earth in between. These eclipses are safe to watch and can be easily observed by a large portion of the global population.
Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Sun and Earth. When the Moon and Sun align, the day turns into night during a total solar eclipse. It's essential to watch solar eclipses with proper safety glasses, as looking at the Sun during the moments before and after the total eclipse can harm the retina of the eye.     
## History and eclipses
The earliest recorded data of eclipses can be traced back to a Babylonian record in 731 B.C. These historical records have been invaluable in helping scientists determine that the Earth's rotation rate changes over time. Approximately 2,500 years ago, a day was nearly 42 milliseconds shorter than it is today. This change is attributed to various factors, including solar and lunar tides, as well as other non-tidal influences. (9, pp. 4)
## Eclipse science
Eclipses are not only astonishing events but also have a scientific importance. One of the scientific achievements was the confirmation of Einstein’s general theory of relativity in 1919, proving space-warping by the mass of the Sun during a solar eclipse.
Solar eclipses also make possible the observation of the solar corona, or the Sun’s outermost part of the atmosphere. The discovery of Helium was possible partly because of the analysis of the Sun chromosphere by Pierre Janssen, part of the solar corona, which was almost 30 years before it was identified on earth. (9, pp. 7)
Solar eclipses have notable effects on the ionosphere, Earth's upper atmosphere, offering a unique opportunity to study the ionosphere's response to abrupt changes in solar radiation. These effects are typically temporary and localized to the region experiencing the eclipse. 10
## Eclipse Safety
Lunar eclipses are observable, but it's crucial to take cautionary measures when gazing at solar eclipses to protect your eyes. Looking at the sun during partial or annular solar eclipses is unsafe without proper protection. It is only safe to observe the sun directly during the brief moments of totality in a total solar eclipse.
For proper protection, it is important to use eclipse glasses that are coherent with the international standards. If you plan on using optical devices, make sure to use specially designed solar filters to prevent the risk of severe eye injuries. 11
