# Script
Four to seven times a year, the Sun, Earth and Moon align, gifting us with awe-inspiring phenomena, eclipses. (Eclipse seasons) These events occur only with a full Moon on eclipse seasons, which are the two periods in a year where the three heavenly bodies align. Eclipse seasons last close to 35 days and up to three eclipses can take place in each of them. (Predicting eclipses) Eclipses can be accurately predicted thanks to the contributions of scientists like Friedrich Bessel, who significantly simplified the process using values related to the Moon’s position relative to Earth and whose ideas still help predict eclipses to this day.
Eclipses are not always similar, as the alignment determines how they will be seen. (Seeing an eclipse at a given time) This is because, as the observable elements relate to each other in orbital motion, an eclipse being visible from the entire world is impossible. Eclipses are only visible to those in the range of the casted shadow. This shadow can be dissected into the penumbra, the exterior region, and the umbra, the inner region.
(Lunar eclipses) In lunar eclipses, when the Earth’s shadow is cast over the Moon as it gets in between the Moon and the Sun, the likelihood of observing an eclipse is much higher than in solar eclipses and these are safe-to-watch events. The shadow is cast over the Moon, and so the effects of the eclipse can be seen from entire hemispheres. When the Moon goes completely over the umbra of the casted shadow, it turns to a reddish color. This is known as a “Blood Moon” or a total lunar eclipse and it’s possible since shorter wavelength colors are scattered by the Earth’s atmosphere, leaving only longer wavelength colors such as red and orange to go through and give the Moon its distinctive hue. As it goes further into the penumbra, it is a partial lunar eclipse and the shadow covers the Moon partially and then recedes. If the Moon doesn’t go through the Umbra at any given time during the eclipse, it is called a penumbral lunar eclipse.
(Solar eclipses) In solar eclipses, the Moon casts its shadow over the Earth as it gets in between the Sun and Earth. These events are visible only from specific locations. The region where the Moon’s umbra covers the Earth’s surface is known as the path of totality and is the only area where solar eclipses can be fully experienced. 
Although the Moon is approximately 400 times smaller than the Sun, solar eclipses are possible because the Moon is also 400 times closer to the Earth, making the Moon capable of covering the Sun when the alignment is right. This proportion is not constant, as the Moon gradually shifts a few centimeters away from Earth each year. Still, solar eclipses will remain possible for another 600 million years.
Total solar eclipses occur when the Moon completely blocks the Sun. The sky’s darkens and the Sun’s corona or outer atmosphere becomes visible.
Annular solar eclipses happen when the Moon it’s at its apogee, or the furthest point from Earth, as the orbital motion is not round but elliptical. As it appears smaller, our natural satellite can’t fully cover the Sun, making a ring-like form visible. In different parts of the umbra, it is possible to witness an annular and total solar eclipse at the same time due to the curvature of the Earth. This is known as hybrid solar eclipses. Partial solar eclipses occur when the Sun, Moon and Earth aren’t perfectly lined up. Those in the penumbra will always see partial solar eclipses when total and annular ones take place.
Solar eclipses are not safe to watch directly, as the Sun’s radiation can greatly damage the eye. (Eclipse safety) Directly looking at the sun during partial or annular solar eclipses is unsafe without proper eye protection. It is only safe to observe the sun directly during the brief moments of totality in a total solar eclipse. It is important to use eclipse glasses that adhere to international standards or specially designed solar filters when using optical devices.
(Eclipse science) Eclipses are not only remarkable events but also hold significant scientific importance. These occurrences have been historical and scientific game-changers.
Solar eclipses have been a source of great knowledge and have helped with scientific research such as to confirm Einstein’s theory of relativity. The relationship between Sun, Earth and Moon has been evolving over the course of billions of years, gifting us with astonishingly beautiful and intricate sights that can be charming for both the eyes and the keen mind.
